dualstack kep updates (#2325)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/563-dual-stack/README.md

    - [Changes Required](#changes-required)
- [Test Plan](#test-plan)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)

>   - [Feature Enablement and Rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)

Reviewer: Please create a subheading called `Production Readiness Review Questionnaire` and complete the remaining 4 sections. See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/NNNN-kep-template#production-readiness-review-questionnaire for the template

endpoint addresses. Some other considerations of CoreDNS support for
dual-stack:

> - For dual-stack services, CoreDNS will be updated to read both IPFamilies

Reviewer 2: I think that this is more accurate if we describe exactly how CoreDNS generate the records:

```suggestion
- For dual-stack services, CoreDNS will read the endpoint slices generated for each IP Family and generate the corresponding A and AAAA records for the service.
```
```

Author: Thanks. I added this.

  assigned to the service.
- For single-stack services, CoreDNS will operate as is. Service IPs will remain 
  single-family, pods will continue to access the CoreDNS server via a single service 
  IP. In other words, the nameserver entries in a pod's /etc/resolv.conf will typically
  be a single IPv4 or single IPv6 address, depending upon the IP family of the cluster's 

>   service CIDR.

Reviewer 2: is this needed?  if your DNS nameserver is fd00:1:2:3::10 you can only use IPv6 to access it, same if it is 192.168.1.1, you can use IPv4 only.
If the resolv.conf doesn't have the DNS serviceIP is a bug

Author: I am not sure i understand the issue here.

Reviewer 2: I was thinking if this is somehow redundant, just wondering why do you want to make it explicit, not a big deal, disregard the comment if you want.

Author: Thanks.

endpoint addresses. Some other considerations of CoreDNS support for
dual-stack:

- For dual-stack services, CoreDNS read the endpoint slices generated for each IPFamily
  and create the corresponding A and AAAA records for the service.
- For single-stack services, CoreDNS will operate as is. Service IPs will remain 
  single-family, pods will continue to access the CoreDNS server via a single service 
  IP. In other words, the nameserver entries in a pod's /etc/resolv.conf will typically

>   be a single IPv4 or single IPv6 address, depending upon the IP family of the cluster's 

Reviewer 3: should we make a statement about resolv.conf `nameserver` when the DNS service ITSELF is dual-stack?

endpoint addresses. Some other considerations of CoreDNS support for
dual-stack:

- For dual-stack services, CoreDNS read the endpoint slices generated for each IPFamily
  and create the corresponding A and AAAA records for the service.
- For single-stack services, CoreDNS will operate as is. Service IPs will remain 
  single-family, pods will continue to access the CoreDNS server via a single service 
  IP. In other words, the nameserver entries in a pod's /etc/resolv.conf will typically
  be a single IPv4 or single IPv6 address, depending upon the IP family of the cluster's 
  service CIDR.
- Non-headless Kubernetes services: CoreDNS will resolve these services to
  either an IPv4 entry (A record) or an IPv6 entry (AAAA record), depending
  upon the IP family of the cluster's service CIDR.
- Headless Kubernetes services: CoreDNS will resolve these services to either
  an IPv4 entry (A record), an IPv6 entry (AAAA record), or both, depending on
  the service's `ipFamily`.

> - Once Kubernetes service (pointing to Cluster DNS) is converted to dualstack pods 

Author: yes. we updated both downward api and resolv.conf

> - Once Kubernetes service (pointing to Cluster DNS) is converted to dualstack pods 

Reviewer 2: Hmmm I'm not sure about this same as Tim says ...

> - Once Kubernetes service (pointing to Cluster DNS) is converted to dualstack pods 

Reviewer 2: it wasn't resolv conf, it was downward api and hostname :)
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/83123

* e2e test successfully running on two platforms
* testing ingress controller infrastructure with updated dual-stack services
* dualstack tests run as pre-submit blocking for PRs

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
    - Feature gate name: IPv6DualStack

>     - Components depending on the feature gate: api-server, controller-manager, and kubelet

Reviewer: [nit] Please use the following names for consistency
      - kube-apiserver
      - kube-controller-manager
      - kubelet
      - kube-proxy

  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
      plane?
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning

>       of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

Reviewer: Can you please provide responses to these questions?

Author: These questions apply in case of `other` no?

Reviewer: Ah yes! Please ignore

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  No. Pods and Services will remain single stack until cli flags have been modified
  as described in this KEP. Once modified, existing and new services will remain
  single stack until user requests otherwise. Pods will become dual-stack however
  it will maintain the same ipfamily used in before enabling feature flag.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Yes.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**
  Similar to enable it the first time on a cluster.

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
  The feature is being tested using integration tests with gate on/off. Additionally, 

>   the feature is being tested on -some of - the cloud providers and kind.

Reviewer: Should we link these here?

* e2e test successfully running on two platforms
* testing ingress controller infrastructure with updated dual-stack services
* dualstack tests run as pre-submit blocking for PRs

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
    - Feature gate name: IPv6DualStack
    - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager, kube-proxy, and kubelet
  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
      plane?
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
      of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  No. Pods and Services will remain single stack until cli flags have been modified
  as described in this KEP. Once modified, existing and new services will remain

>   single stack until user requests otherwise. Pods will become dual-stack however

Reviewer 3: Pods will only "become dual stack" if their net driver is actually allocating both families, which might be happening already and just not exposed or might only start happening once the gate is opened and dual-stack CIDRs are allocated per node.

Author: Do we need to ref a hack used by super users on specific CNIs?

Reviewer 2: We "forgot" to feature gate podips, so they are always present. They really are out of kubernetes and depend on the CRI/CNi , what does depend is the IP order reported in the API https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97979

Reviewer 3: I don't think it is a real risk, and I guess the question is "default behavior", so OK.

  it will maintain the same ipfamily used in before enabling feature flag.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Yes.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**
  Similar to enable it the first time on a cluster.

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
  The feature is being tested using integration tests with gate on/off. The
  tests can be found here: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/integration/dualstack

  The feature is being tested on -some of - the cloud providers and kind.
   1. https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-network-dualstack-azure-e2e. This has all dualstack tests on azure.
   2. kind dual-stack iptables: https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-network-kind#sig-network-kind,%20dual,%20master
   3. kind dual-stack ipvs: https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-network-kind#sig-network-kind,%20ipvs,%20master

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

* **How can a rollout fail? Can it impact already running workloads?**

>   Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart

Reviewer 3: We should be able to fill this out?

   mid-rollout?

* **What specific metrics should inform a rollback?**
  N/A

* **Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?**
  Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
  Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
  are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.

* **Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, 
fields of API types, flags, etc.?**
  Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.

### Monitoring Requirements

> * **How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?**

Reviewer 3: Maybe paste a kubectl command that shows how many services are using `ipFamilyPolicy` != (Single || "")

Reviewer 3: Do we want to add a metric for number of services broken down by `ipFamilyPolicy` ?

Author: I understand. My point is the existence of a service does not mean it is used by a workload. Services are not like PVs where they have a relation to a PVC/node (attach)/Pod (mount) they are a stand a lone object.

Reviewer 3: I interpret this question more broadly - "how can a cluster admin know if the feature is in use".  To me that means "are there services actively using or trying to use dual-stack"

  No

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?**
  No

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud 
provider?**
  No

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of 
the existing API objects?**
  Enabling this feature increases the size of Service object. The service 
  object has three new fields. The additional fields represent estimated 
  less than 512B.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any 
operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs]?**
  No

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of 
resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?**
  No

### Troubleshooting

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.

* **How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?**
  This feature will not be operable if either kube-apiserver or etcd is unavailable.

* **What are other known failure modes?**

>   For each of them, fill in the following information by copying the below template:

Reviewer 3: How about "Dual-stack-requesting services are not allocated 2 IPs"

I am sure we can think up more ways it can fall over

Author: That won't be a failure. That would be a bug. I believe these operational failures.no?

Reviewer 3: This is about operability.  If an operator sees services requesting but not getting dual-stack, what should they do?

  as described in this KEP. Once modified, existing and new services will remain
  single stack until user requests otherwise. Pods will become dual-stack however
  it will maintain the same ipfamily used in before enabling feature flag.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Yes.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**
  Similar to enable it the first time on a cluster.

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
  The feature is being tested using integration tests with gate on/off. The
  tests can be found here: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/integration/dualstack

  The feature is being tested on -some of - the cloud providers and kind.
   1. https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-network-dualstack-azure-e2e. This has all dualstack tests on azure.
   2. kind dual-stack iptables: https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-network-kind#sig-network-kind,%20dual,%20master
   3. kind dual-stack ipvs: https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-network-kind#sig-network-kind,%20ipvs,%20master

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

> _This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

Reviewer: Remove this line

* **How can a rollout fail? Can it impact already running workloads?**
  Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
   mid-rollout?

> * **What specific metrics should inform a rollback?**

Reviewer: Should these questions be answered. If not, put N/A

* **Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?**
  Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
  Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
  are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.

* **Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, 
fields of API types, flags, etc.?**
  Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.

### Monitoring Requirements

> _This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

Reviewer: [nit] remove this line
